Block Model Generation/Datagen (#268)
FabricMC/fabric-docs: develop/data-generation/block-models.md

---
title: Block Model Generation
description: A guide to generating block models and blockstates via datagen.
authors:
  - Fellteros
  - natri0
  - IMB11
  - its-miroma
---

# Block Model Generation {#block-model-generation}

::: info PREREQUISITES
Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.
:::

## Setup {#setup}

First, we will need to create our ModelProvider. Create a class that `extends FabricModelProvider`. Implement both abstract methods: `generateBlockStateModels` and `generateItemModels`.
Lastly, create a constructor matching super.

> @[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:provider](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Reviewer: Imports should not be included in this code block.

Author: They are included in the recipe datagen tutorial at the same place though.

Reviewer 2: that's a mistake, I agree with IMB11

Create a `VerticalSlab` block with a `FACING` property and a `SINGLE` boolean property, like in the [Block States](../blocks/blockstates) tutorial. `SINGLE` will indicate if there are both slabs.
Then you should override `getOutlineShape` and `getCollisionShape`, so that the outline is rendered correctly, and the block has the correct collision shape.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:voxels](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:collision](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

Also override the `canReplace()` method, otherwise you couldn't make the slab a full block.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:replace](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

And you're done! You can now test the block out and place it in game.

### Parent Block Model {#parent-block-model}

Now, let's create a parent block model. It will determine the size, position in hand or other slots and the `x` and `y` coordinates of the texture.

> I highly recommend using [Blockbench](https://www.blockbench.net/) for this, as making it manually is a really tedious process. It should look something like this:

Reviewer: Shouldnt be "I recommend", should be "It's recommended to use an editor such as Blockbench ..."

> @[code lang=json](@/reference/latest/src/main/resources/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/vertical_slab.json)

Reviewer: Nitpick, but theres quite alot of formatting issues in this JSON file.

The `BlockStateSupplier` contains all blockstate variants, their rotation, and other options like uvlock.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:supplier](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

First, we create a new `VariantsBlockStateSupplier` using `VariantsBlockStateSupplier.create()`.
Then we create a new `BlockStateVariantMap` that contains parameters for all variants of the block, in this case `FACING` and `SINGLE`, and pass it into the `VariantsBlockStateSupplier`.
Specify which model and which transformations (uvlock, rotation) is used when using `.register()`.
For example:

- On the first line, the block is facing north, and is single => we use the model with no rotation.
- On the fourth line, the block is facing west, and is single => we rotate the model on the Y axis by 270°.
- On the sixth line, the block is facing east, but isn't single => it looks like a normal oak log => we don't have to rotate it.

### Custom Datagen Method {#custom-datagen-method}

The last step - creating an actual method you can call and that will generate the JSONs.
But what are the parameters for?

> 1. `BlockStateModelGenerator bsmg`, the same one that got passed into `generateBlockStateModels`.

Reviewer: nitpick, change the parameter name, `bsmg` -> `generator`, etc. Make it self-documenting, from a glance, `bsmg` is not clear.

3. `Block fullBlock` - is the model used when the `SINGLE` property is false = the slab block looks like a full block.
4. `TextureMap textures` defines the actual textures the model uses. See the [Using Texture Map](#using-texture-map) chapter.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:gen](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

First, we get the `Identifier` of the single slab model with `VERTICAL_SLAB.upload()`. Then we get the `Identifier` of the full block model with `ModelIds.getBlockModelId()`, and pass those two models into `createVerticalSlabBlockStates`.
The `BlockStateSupplier` gets passed into the `blockStateCollector`, so that the JSON files are actually generated.
Also, we create a model for the vertical slab item with `BlockStateModelGenerator.registerParentedItemModel()`.

And that is all! Now all that's left to do is to call our method in our `ModelProvider`:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:method-call](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

## Sources and Links {#sources-and-links}

> You can view the example tests in Fabric API and the Fabric docs reference mod for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can view the example tests in [Fabric API](https://github.com/FabricMC/fabric/blob/1.21.4/fabric-data-generation-api-v1/src/) and this documentation's [Reference Mod](https://github.com/FabricMC/fabric-docs/tree/main/reference) for more information.
```

---
title: Block Model Generation
description: A guide to generating block models & blockstates via datagen.
authors:
  - Fellteros
  - natri0
  - IMB11
---

> # Block Model Generation {#model-generation}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Block Model Generation {#block-model-generation}
```

> ::: info Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
::: info PREREQUISITES
```

Author: @its-miroma IMB11 said I shouldn't capitalize callouts. Is this a special case where I should?

Reviewer 2: you shouldn't capitalize the keyword (info, warning, error, details...), but you should capitalize the custom title

See https://github.com/FabricMC/fabric-docs/blob/caf30e40dafac8fb076ffa4c764aa9701195ef5e/develop/data-generation/translations.md?plain=1#L17

Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.
:::

## Setup {#setup}

> First, we will need to create our ModelProvider. Create a class that `extends FabricModelProvider`. Implement both abstract methods, `generateBlockStateModels` & `generateItemModels`.
> Lastly, create constructor matching super.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, we will need to create our ModelProvider. Create a class that `extends FabricModelProvider`. Implement both abstract methods: `generateBlockStateModels` and `generateItemModels`.
Lastly, create a constructor matching super.
```

### Singletons {#singletons}

The `registerSingleton` method provides JSON model files based on the `TexturedModel` you pass in and a single blockstate variant.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:cube-top-for-ends](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

This method will generate models for a normal cube, that uses the texture file `pipe_block` for the sides and the texture file `pipe_block_top` for the top and bottom sides.

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/pipe_block.json)

:::tip
If you're stuck choosing which `TextureModel` you should use, open the `TexturedModel` class and look at the [`TextureMaps`](#using-texture-map)!
:::

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/pipe_block_textures_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/pipe_block_textures.zip">Pipe Block</DownloadEntry>

### Block Texture Pool {#block-texture-pool}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-normal](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> Another useful method is `registerCubeAllModelTexturePool`. Define the textures by passing in the "base block", and then append the "children", which will have the same textures.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Another useful method is `registerCubeAllModelTexturePool`: define the textures by passing in the "base block", and then append the "children", which will have the same textures.
```

In this case, we passed in the `RUBY_BLOCK`, so the stairs, slab and fence will use the `RUBY_BLOCK` texture.

> **_It will also generate a [simple cube all JSON model](#simple-cube-all) for the "base block" to ensure that it has a block model._**
> Be aware of this, if you're changing block model of this particular block, as it will result in en error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

::: warning
It will also generate a [simple cube all JSON model](#simple-cube-all) for the "base block" to ensure that it has a block model.

Be aware of this if you're changing block model of this particular block, as it will result in en error.
:::

```

You can also append a `BlockFamily`, which will generate models for all of its "children".

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:family-declaration](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/ModBlocks.java)

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-family](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/ruby_block_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/ruby_block.png">Ruby Block</DownloadEntry>

### Doors and Trapdoors {#doors-and-trapdoors}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:door-and-trapdoor](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Doors and trapdoors are a little different. Here, you have to make three new textures - two for the door, and one for the trapdoor.

> 1. **The door**. It has two parts - the upper half and the lower half. **Each needs its own texture:** in this case `ruby_door_top` for the upper half and `ruby_door_bottom` for the lower.
> The `registerDoor()` method will create models for all orientations of the door, both open and closed.
> **You also need an item texture!** Put it in `assets/<mod_id>/textures/item/` folder.
> 2. **The trapdoor**. Here, you need only one texture, in this case named `ruby_trapdoor`. It will be used for all sides.
> Since `TrapdoorBlock` has a `FACING` property, you can use the commented out method to generate model files with rotated textures = the trapdoor will be "orientable".
> Otherwise, it will look the same no matter the direction it's facing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The door:
  - It has two parts - the upper half and the lower half. **Each needs its own texture:** in this case `ruby_door_top` for the upper half and `ruby_door_bottom` for the lower.
  - The `registerDoor()` method will create models for all orientations of the door, both open and closed.
  - **You also need an item texture!** Put it in `assets/mod_id/textures/item/` folder.
2. **The trapdoor**:
  - Here, you need only one texture, in this case named `ruby_trapdoor`. It will be used for all sides.
  - Since `TrapdoorBlock` has a `FACING` property, you can use the commented out method to generate model files with rotated textures = the trapdoor will be "orientable". Otherwise, it will look the same no matter the direction it's facing.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm unsure of my layout, open to suggestions

<DownloadEntry visualURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/ruby_door_trapdoor_big.png" downloadURL="/assets/develop/data-generation/block-model/ruby_door_trapdoor_textures.zip">Ruby Door and Trapdoor</DownloadEntry>

> ## Custom Block Models and Datagen Methods {#custom-models-and-methods}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Custom Block Models {#custom-block-models}
```

> In this section, we'll create the models for a **vertical slab block** with Oak Log textures => _Vertical Oak Log Slab_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this section, we'll create the models for a Vertical Oak Log Slab, with Oak Log textures.
```

      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "firstperson_lefthand": {
      "rotation": [ 0, 315, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 2, 0],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "thirdperson_righthand": {
      "rotation": [ 75, -45, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 0, 2],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "thirdperson_lefthand": {
      "rotation": [ 75, 315, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 0, 2],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    }
  },
  "elements": [
    {   "from": [ 0, 0, 0 ],
      "to": [ 16, 16, 8 ],
      "faces": {
        "down":  { "uv": [ 0, 8, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#bottom", "cullface": "down", "tintindex": 0 },
        "up":    { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 8 ], "texture": "#top",    "cullface": "up", "tintindex": 0 },
        "north": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "north", "tintindex": 0 },
        "south": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side", "tintindex": 0 },
        "west":  { "uv": [ 0, 0, 8, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "west", "tintindex": 0 },
        "east":  { "uv": [ 8, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "east", "tintindex": 0 }
      }
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: should this be transcluded?

See [how blockstates are formatted](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Blockstates_definition_format) for more information.
Notice the `#bottom`, `#top`, `#side` keywords. They act as variables that can be set by models that have this one as a parent:

```json
{
  "parent": "minecraft:block/cube_bottom_top",
  "textures": {
    "bottom": "minecraft:block/sandstone_bottom",
    "side": "minecraft:block/sandstone",
    "top": "minecraft:block/sandstone_top"
  }
}
```

> The `bottom` value will replace the `#bottom` placeholder and so on. **Put it in the `resources/assets/<mod_id>/models/block/` folder.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `bottom` value will replace the `#bottom` placeholder and so on. **Put it in the `resources/assets/mod_id/models/block/` folder.**
```

### Custom Model {#custom-model}

Another thing we will need is an instance of the `Model` class. It will represent the actual [parent block model](#parent-block-model) inside our mod.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:model](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> The `block()` method creates a new `Model`, pointing to the `vertical_slab.json` file inside the `resources/assets/<mod_id>/models/block/` folder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `block()` method creates a new `Model`, pointing to the `vertical_slab.json` file inside the `resources/assets/mod_id/models/block/` folder.
```

The `TextureKey`s represent the "placeholders" (`#bottom`, `#top`, ...) as an Object.

### Using Texture Map {#using-texture-map}

What does `TextureMap` do? It actually provides the Identifiers that point to the textures. It technically behaves like a normal map - you associate a `TextureKey` (Key) with an `Identifier` (Value).

> You can:
> 
> 1. Use the Vanilla ones, e.g. `TextureMap.all()`(associates all TextureKeys with the same Identifier) or other.
> 2. Create a new one by creating a new instance and then using `.put()` to associate keys with values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can either use the vanilla ones, like `TextureMap.all()`(which associates all TextureKeys with the same Identifier), or create a new one, by creating a new instance and then using `.put()` to associate keys with values.
```

::: tip
`TextureMap.all()` associates all TextureKeys with the same Identifier, no matter how many of them there are!
:::

Since we want to use the Oak Log textures, but have the ``BOTTOM``, ``TOP`` and ``SIDE`` ``TextureKey``s, we need to create a new one.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:texture-map](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

The ``bottom`` and ``top`` faces will use `oak_log_top.png`, the sides will use `oak_log.png`.

::: warning
All `TextureKey`s in the TextureMap **have to** match all `TextureKey`s in your parent block model!
:::

> ### Custom BlockStateSupplier Method {#custom-supplier-method}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Custom `BlockStateSupplier` Method {#custom-supplier-method}
```

3. `Block fullBlock` - is the model used when the `SINGLE` property is false = the slab block looks like a full block.
4. `TextureMap textures` defines the actual textures the model uses. See the [Using Texture Map](#using-texture-map) chapter.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:gen](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

First, we get the `Identifier` of the single slab model with `VERTICAL_SLAB.upload()`. Then we get the `Identifier` of the full block model with `ModelIds.getBlockModelId()`, and pass those two models into `createVerticalSlabBlockStates`.
The `BlockStateSupplier` gets passed into the `blockStateCollector`, so that the JSON files are actually generated.
Also, we create a model for the vertical slab item with `BlockStateModelGenerator.registerParentedItemModel()`.

And that is all! Now all that's left to do is to call our method in our `ModelProvider`:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:method-call](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

## Sources and Links {#sources-and-links}

> Other examples of using custom datagen methods have been created using [Vanilla+ Blocks](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillablocksplus) and [Vanilla+ Verticals](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillavsplus) mods.
> You can also view the example tests in Fabric API and the Fabric docs reference mod for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can view the example tests in Fabric API and the Fabric docs reference mod for more information.
You can also find more examples of using custom datagen methods by browsing mods' open-source code, for example [Vanilla+ Blocks](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillablocksplus) and [Vanilla+ Verticals](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillavsplus) by Fellteros.
```

---
title: Block Model Generation
description: A guide to generating block models & blockstates via datagen.
authors:
  - Fellteros
  - natri0
---

# Block Model Generation {#model-generation}

> ::: info PREREQUISITES

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: info Prerequisites
```

Reviewer: Generally, you shouldn't capitalize callouts.

Make sure you've completed the [datagen setup](./setup) process first.
:::

## Setup {#setup}

> First, we will need to create our ModelProvider. Create a plain Java class that `extends FabricModelProvider`. Implement both abstract methods, `generateBlockStateModels` & `generateItemModels`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we will need to create our ModelProvider. Create a class that `extends FabricModelProvider`. Implement both abstract methods, `generateBlockStateModels` & `generateItemModels`.
```

Lastly, create constructor matching super.

:::tip

> If you're developing mods in JetBrains' Intellij Idea, you can press `Alt+Shift+Enter` while hovering over the problem to bring up a quick fix menu!

Reviewer: We assume they're using IDEA, this is out of scope, the documentation assumes they know how to use an IDE. I'd remove this.

Reviewer: Also the callout syntax is invalid, should be `::: tip` not `:::tip`

Reviewer: https://vitepress.dev/guide/markdown#custom-containers

:::

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:provider](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Register this class in your `DataGeneratorEntrypoint` within the `onInitializeDataGenerator` method.

## Blockstates and block models {#blockstates-and-block-models}

::: info PREREQUISITES

> You'll have to register the blocks, to which you want the data to be generated. Also see the [blockstate](../blocks/blockstates.md) and [first block](../blocks/first-block.md) tutorials.

Reviewer: Again, if they're on this page, they likely already have block models and want to migrate to data generation. This is unnecessary.

:::

```java
@Override
public void generateBlockStateModels(BlockStateModelGenerator blockStateModelGenerator) {
}
```

> This part of the tutorial will happen entirely in the `generateBlockStateModels` method. Notice the parameter `BlockStateModelGenerator blockStateModelGenerator` - this class will be responsible for generating all the JSON files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For block models, we will primarily be focusing on the `generateBlockStateModels` method. Notice the parameter `BlockStateModelGenerator blockStateModelGenerator` - this object will be responsible for generating all the JSON files.
```

Here are some handy examples you can use to generate your desired models:

### Simple Cube All {#simple-cube-all}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:cube-all](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> The easiest and most basic method there is. It generates a JSON model file for a normal cubic block. One texture is used for all six sides, in this case we use `steel_block`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is the most commonly used function. It generates a JSON model file for a normal `cube_all` block model. One texture is used for all six sides, in this case we use `steel_block`.
```

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/steel_block.json)

> It also generates a blockstate JSON file. Since we have no blockstates (e.g. Axis, Facing, ...), one variant is sufficient, and is used everytime the block is placed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It also generates a blockstate JSON file. Since we have no blockstate properties (e.g. Axis, Facing, ...), one variant is sufficient, and is used every time the block is placed.
```

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/blockstates/steel_block.json)

### Singletons {#singletons}

> The `registerSingleton` method provides JSON model files based on the `TexturedModel` you pass in and a single blockstate variant. For example

Reviewer: Dont split a paragraph up with a code block. Do `For example, take a look at this XX:` or something similar.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:cube-top-for-ends](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> will generate models for a normal cube, that uses a PNG file `pipe_block` for the sides and a PNG file `pipe_block_top` for the top and bottom sides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will generate models for a normal cube, that uses the texture file `pipe_block` for the sides and the texture file `pipe_block_top` for the top and bottom sides.
```

@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/pipe_block.json)

:::tip

> If you're stuck choosing which TextureModel you should use, open the `TexturedModel` class and look at the [`TextureMaps`](#using-texture-map)!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're stuck choosing which `TextureModel` you should use, open the `TexturedModel` class and look at the [`TextureMaps`](#using-texture-map)!
```

:::

### Block Texture Pool {#block-texture-pool}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-normal](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Another useful method is `registerCubeAllModelTexturePool`. Define the textures by passing in the "base block", and then append the "children", which will have the same textures. <br>
In this case, we passed in the `RUBY_BLOCK`, so the stairs, slab and fence will use the `RUBY_BLOCK` texture.
***It will also generate a [simple cube all JSON model](#simple-cube-all) for the "base block" to ensure that it has a block model.***
Be aware of this, if you're changing block model of this particular block, as it will result in en error.<br>

You can also append a `BlockFamily`, which will generate models for all of its "children".

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-family](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

::: warning

> Make sure you're using the correct Block class when passing in the block!

Reviewer: Not needed, IDE and compiler wont let you pass anything that isn't the required type (even with casting)

For example, in the `.stairs()` method, you have to pass in an instance of StairsBlock; in `.slab()`, it has to be an instance of SlabBlock and so on! 
:::

### Doors and Trapdoors {#doors-and-trapdoors}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:door-and-trapdoor](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> Doors and trapdoors are a little different. Here, you have to make three new textures - two for the door, and one for the trapdoor. <br>

Reviewer: Dont use `<br>` before lists.

1. **The door**. It has two parts - the upper half and the lower half. **Each needs its own texture:** in this case `ruby_door_top` for the upper half and `ruby_door_bottom` for the lower.

> The `registerDoor()` method will create models for all orientations of the door, both open and closed. <br>

Reviewer: Again dont use `<br>` at all

**You also need an item texture!** Put it in `assets/<mod_id>/textures/item/` folder.
2. **The trapdoor**. Here, you need only one texture, in this case named `ruby_trapdoor`. It will be used for all sides.
Since `TrapdoorBlock` has a `FACING` property, you can use the commented out method to generate model files with rotated textures = the trapdoor will be "orientable".
Otherwise, it will look the same no matter the direction it's facing.

::: warning
Again, make sure the door and trapdoor blocks are instances of their corresponding block classes (`DoorBlock`, `TrapdoorBlock`)!
:::

## Custom Block Models and Datagen Methods {#custom-models-and-methods}

> In this tutorial we'll create the models for a **vertical slab block** with Oak Log textures => _Vertical Oak Log Slab_.

Reviewer: You dont need to say "in this tutorial" in every new section.

> ::: info THINGS WE WILL NEED

Reviewer: Dont capitalize callouts.

Reviewer: With the size of this section, I feel like it could be worth being a separate subpage.

Reviewer: Also, no need to have an in-page table of contents, that's what the sidebar is for.

      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "firstperson_lefthand": {
      "rotation": [ 0, 315, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 2, 0],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "thirdperson_righthand": {
      "rotation": [ 75, -45, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 0, 2],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    },
    "thirdperson_lefthand": {
      "rotation": [ 75, 315, 0 ],
      "translation": [ 0, 0, 2],
      "scale":[ 0.375, 0.375, 0.375 ]
    }
  },
  "elements": [
    {   "from": [ 0, 0, 0 ],
      "to": [ 16, 16, 8 ],
      "faces": {
        "down":  { "uv": [ 0, 8, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#bottom", "cullface": "down", "tintindex": 0 },
        "up":    { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 8 ], "texture": "#top",    "cullface": "up", "tintindex": 0 },
        "north": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "north", "tintindex": 0 },
        "south": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side", "tintindex": 0 },
        "west":  { "uv": [ 0, 0, 8, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "west", "tintindex": 0 },
        "east":  { "uv": [ 8, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "east", "tintindex": 0 }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> See [how blockstates are formatted](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Blockstates_definition_format) for more information. <br>

Reviewer: Dont use `<br>`

3. `Block fullBlock` - is the model used when the `SINGLE` property is false = the slab block looks like a full block.
4. `TextureMap textures` defines the actual textures the model uses. See the [Using Texture Map](#using-texture-map) chapter.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:gen](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

First, we get the `Identifier` of the single slab model with `VERTICAL_SLAB.upload()`. Then we get the `Identifier` of the full block model with `ModelIds.getBlockModelId()`, and pass those two models into `createVerticalSlabBlockStates`.
The `BlockStateSupplier` gets passed into the `blockStateCollector`, so that the JSON files are actually generated.
Also, we create a model for the vertical slab item with `BlockStateModelGenerator.registerParentedItemModel()`.

And that is all! Now all that's left to do is to call our method in our `ModelProvider`:

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:method-call](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

## Sources and links {#sources-and-links}

> Other examples of implementing custom datagen methods can be found [here](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillablocksplus) and [here](https://github.com/Fellteros/vanillavsplus)

Reviewer: This shouldn't be provided as an example for wider datagen, you should instead have something like "Examples and explanations have been created using [vanillablocksplus] and [vanillavsplus] as reference, you can also view the example tests in Fabric API and the docs reference mod for further examples."

> Textures, free to download:

Reviewer: Put the download entry where the textures are used, not at the end of the page.

:::

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:provider](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Register this class in your `DataGeneratorEntrypoint` within the `onInitializeDataGenerator` method.

## Blockstates and block models {#blockstates-and-block-models}

::: info PREREQUISITES
You'll have to register the blocks, to which you want the data to be generated. Also see the [blockstate](../blocks/blockstates.md) and [first block](../blocks/first-block.md) tutorials.
:::

```java
@Override
public void generateBlockStateModels(BlockStateModelGenerator blockStateModelGenerator) {
}
```

This part of the tutorial will happen entirely in the `generateBlockStateModels` method. Notice the parameter `BlockStateModelGenerator blockStateModelGenerator` - this class will be responsible for generating all the JSON files.
Here are some handy examples you can use to generate your desired models:

### Simple Cube All {#simple-cube-all}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:cube-all](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> The easiest and most basic method there is. It generates a JSON model file for a normal cubic block. It provides the same texture (named `steel_block`) for all six sides.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The easiest and most basic method there is. It generates a JSON model file for a normal cubic block. One texture is used for all six sides, in this case we use `steel_block`.
```

```json
{
  "parent": "minecraft:block/cube_all",
  "textures": {
    "all": "fabric-docs-reference:block/steel_block"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: perhaps this could be just included from a datagenned file?

```suggestion
@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/steel_block.json)
```

It also generates a blockstate JSON file. Since we have no blockstates (e.g. Axis, Facing, ...), one variant is sufficient, and is used everytime the block is placed.

```json
{
  "variants": {
    "": {
      "model": "fabric-docs-reference:block/steel_block"
    }
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: like above

```suggestion
@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/blockstates/steel_block.json)
```

### Singletons {#singletons}

The `registerSingleton` method provides JSON model files based on the `TexturedModel` you pass in and a single blockstate variant. For example

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:cube-top-for-ends](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

will generate models for a normal cube, that uses a PNG file `pipe_block` for the sides and a PNG file `pipe_block_top` for the top and bottom sides.

```json
{
  "parent": "minecraft:block/cube_column",
  "textures": {
    "end": "fabric-docs-reference:block/pipe_block_top",
    "side": "fabric-docs-reference:block/pipe_block"
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
@[code](@/reference/latest/src/main/generated/assets/fabric-docs-reference/models/block/pipe_block.json)
```

:::tip
If you're stuck choosing which TextureModel you should use, open the `TexturedModel` class and look at the `TextureMaps`!
:::

### Block Texture Pool {#block-texture-pool}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-normal](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Another useful method is `registerCubeAllModelTexturePool`. Define the textures by passing in the "base block", and then append the "children", which will have the same textures. <br>
In this case, we passed in the `RUBY_BLOCK`, so the stairs, slab and fence will use the `RUBY_BLOCK` texture.

> ***It will also generate a [simple cube all JSON model](#simple-cube-all) for the "base block" to ensure the texture provision!*** <br>

Reviewer 3: could you please clarify/rewrite the "...to ensure texture provision"? don't understand what you meant here.

You can also append a `BlockFamily`, which will generate models for all of its "children".

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:block-texture-pool-family](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

::: warning
Make sure you're using the correct Block class when passing in the block!
For example, in the `.stairs()` method, you have to pass in an instance of StairsBlock; in `.slab()`, it has to be an instance of SlabBlock and so on! 
:::

### Doors and Trapdoors {#doors-and-trapdoors}

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model:door-and-trapdoor](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

Doors and trapdoors are a little different. Here, you have to make three new textures - two for the door, and one for the trapdoor. <br>

1. **The door**. It has two parts - the upper half and the lower half. **Each needs its own texture:** in this case `ruby_door_top` for the upper half and `ruby_door_bottom` for the lower.

> 8 new model JSONs should be created. <br>

Reviewer 3: pls clarify on the 8 new model JSONs for door? I can see what you meant by looking in the file list but not without that.

```suggestion
The `registerDoor()` method will create models for all orientations of the door, both open and closed. <br>
```

**You also need an item texture!** Put it in `assets/<mod_id>/textures/item/` folder.
2. **The trapdoor**. Here, you need only one texture, in this case named `ruby_trapdoor`. It will be used for all sides.
Since `TrapdoorBlock` has a `FACING` property, you can use the commented out method to generate model files with rotated textures = the trapdoor will be "orientable".

> Otherwise, it will look the same no matter the facing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Otherwise, it will look the same no matter the direction it's facing.
```

::: warning
Again, make sure the door and trapdoor blocks are instances of their corresponding block classes (`DoorBlock`, `TrapdoorBlock`)!
:::

## Custom Block Models and Datagen Methods {#custom-models-and-methods}

> In this tutorial, we will be creating a method, that will generate block models and blockstate for a custom block. <br>
> In this case it will be a **vertical slab block** with Oak Log textures => _Vertical Oak Log Slab_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we'll create the models for a **vertical slab block** with Oak Log textures => _Vertical Oak Log Slab_.
```

Override the `getSidesShape()` method to determine the voxel shape used. Use switch statement and pass in the `direction` variable.
Then call this method in the `getCollisionShape()` & `getOutlineShape()` methods.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:collision](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

Override the `canReplace()` method, otherwise you couldn't make the slab a full block.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:replace](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

Override the `getPlacementState()` method to determine placement blockstate.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:placement](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

Lastly, override the `appendProperties()` method and add both properties to the builder.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:append](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

> And you're done! You can now create a vertical slab block and place it in the game!

Reviewer 3: refer to the Block States tutorial, there's no need to duplicate it here

```suggestion
Create a `VerticalSlab` block with a `FACING` property and a `SINGLE` boolean property, like in the [Block States](../blocks/block-states) tutorial. `SINGLE` will indicate if there's both slabs.

Then you should override `getOutlineShape` and `getCollisionShape`, so that the outline is rendered correctly and the block has the correct collision shape.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:voxels](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:collision](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

Also override the `canReplace()` method, otherwise you couldn't make the slab a full block.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:replace](@/reference/latest/src/main/java/com/example/docs/block/custom/VerticalSlabBlock.java)

And you're done! You can now test the block out and place it in game.
```

      "to": [ 16, 16, 8 ],
      "faces": {
        "down":  { "uv": [ 0, 8, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#bottom", "cullface": "down", "tintindex": 0 },
        "up":    { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 8 ], "texture": "#top",    "cullface": "up", "tintindex": 0 },
        "north": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "north", "tintindex": 0 },
        "south": { "uv": [ 0, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side", "tintindex": 0 },
        "west":  { "uv": [ 0, 0, 8, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "west", "tintindex": 0 },
        "east":  { "uv": [ 8, 0, 16, 16 ], "texture": "#side",   "cullface": "east", "tintindex": 0 }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

See [how blockstates are formatted](https://minecraft.wiki/w/Blockstates_definition_format) for more information. <br>
Notice the `#bottom`, `#top`, `#side` keywords. They act as a kind of "placeholders", that will get replaced by `Identifier`s in the generated JSON file.
Something like in sandstone's model file:
```json
{
  "parent": "minecraft:block/cube_bottom_top",
  "textures": {
    "bottom": "minecraft:block/sandstone_bottom",
    "side": "minecraft:block/sandstone",
    "top": "minecraft:block/sandstone_top"
  }
}
```

> `#bottom` gets "replaced" by the `"bottom"` and so on. **Put it in the `resources/assets/<mod_id>/models/block/` folder.**

Reviewer 3: ````suggestion
Notice the `#bottom`, `#top`, `#side` keywords. They act as variables that can be set by models that have this one as a parent:

```json
{
  "parent": "minecraft:block/cube_bottom_top",
  "textures": {
    "bottom": "minecraft:block/sandstone_bottom",
    "side": "minecraft:block/sandstone",
    "top": "minecraft:block/sandstone_top"
  }
}
```

The `bottom` value will replace the `#bottom` placeholder and so on.
````

The `block()` method creates a new `Model`, pointing to the `vertical_slab.json` file inside the `resources/assets/<mod_id>/models/block/` folder.
The `TextureKey`s represent the "placeholders" (`#bottom`, `#top`, ...) as an Object.

### Using Texture Map {#using-texture-map}

What does `TextureMap` do? It actually provides the Identifiers that point to the textures. It technically behaves like a normal map - you associate a `TextureKey` (Key) with an `Identifier` (Value).
You can:
1. Use the Vanilla ones, e.g. `TextureMap.all()`(associates all TextureKeys with the same Identifier) or other.
2. Create a new one by creating a new instance and then using `.put()` to associate keys with values.

::: tip
`TextureMap.all()` associates all TextureKeys with the same Identifier, no matter how many of them there are!
:::

Since we want to use the Oak Log textures, but have the ``BOTTOM``, ``TOP`` and ``SIDE`` ``TextureKey``s, we need to create a new one.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:texture-map](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> => the ``bottom`` and ``top`` faces will use `oak_log_top.png`, the sides will use `oak_log.png`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The ``bottom`` and ``top`` faces will use `oak_log_top.png`, the sides will use `oak_log.png`.
```

::: warning
All `TextureKey`s in the TextureMap **have to** match all `TextureKey`s in your parent block model! 
:::

### Custom BlockStateSupplier Method {#custom-supplier-method}

The `BlockStateSupplier` contains all blockstate variants, their rotation, and other options like uvlock.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:supplier](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> First, we create a new `VariantsBlockStateSupplier` using `.create()`. Then append `.coordinate()`, in which create a new `BlockStateVariantMap`. Here, pass in all of our properties - in this case `FACING` & `SINGLE`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, we create a new `VariantsBlockStateSupplier` using `VariantsBlockStateSupplier.create()`. Then we create a new `BlockStateVariantMap` that contains parameters for all variants of the block, in this case `FACING` & `SINGLE`, and pass it into the `VariantsBlockStateSupplier`.
```

Specify which model and which transformations (uvlock, rotation) is used when using `.register()`. <br>
For example: 
* On the first line, the block is facing north, and is single => we use the model with no rotation.
* On the fourth line, the block is facing west, and is single => we rotate the model on the Y axis by 270°.
* On the sixth line, the block is facing east, but isn't single => it looks like a normal oak log => we don't have to rotate it.

### Custom Datagen Method {#custom-datagen-method}

The last step - creating an actual method you can call and that will generate the JSONs.
But what are the parameters for?

> 1. `BlockStateModelGenerator bsmg` is used for its variables. **Creating new ones won't work!**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. `BlockStateModelGenerator bsmg`, the same one that got passed into `generateBlockStateModels`.
```

2. `Block vertSlabBlock` is the block to which we will generate the JSONs.
3. `Block fullBlock` - is the model used when the `SINGLE` property is false = the slab block looks like a full block.
4. `TextureMap textures` defines the actual textures the model uses. See the [Using Texture Map](#using-texture-map) chapter.

@[code lang=java transcludeWith=:::datagen-model-custom:gen](@/reference/latest/src/client/java/com/example/docs/datagen/FabricDocsReferenceModelProvider.java)

> Let's go over line by line to really understand what is going on:
> 1. Here we obtain the `Identifier` representing the vertical slab model via the `.upload()` method. We will pass in our [TextureMap](#using-texture-map) when calling this method.
> 2. Here we obtain the `Identifier` of the full block - in our case of Oak Log.
> 3. Here the `Consumer blockStateCollector` is called, accepting all of our blockstate variants.
> 4. Here we register an item model for the vertical slab.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, we get the `Identifier` of the single slab model with `VERTICAL_SLAB.upload()`. Then we get the `Identifier` of the full block model with `ModelIds.getBlockModelId()`, and pass those two models into `createVerticalSlabBlockStates`. The `BlockStateSupplier` gets passed into the `blockStateCollector`, so that the JSON files are actually generated.

Also, we create a model for the vertical slab item with `BlockStateModelGenerator.registerParentedItemModel()`.
```
